!{"type": "examples", "title": "CodeMirror Collaborative Example", "injectCode": ["./collab.ts", "./worker.ts"]}

# Example: Collaborative Editing

Real-time collaborative editing is a technique where multiple people
on different machines can edit the same document at the same time.
Changes are propagated to other participants over the network and show
up in their views of the document as soon as they arrive.

Here's a toy collaborative editing setup that lives within this page:

<style>
  #server {
    width: max-content;
    padding: 2px 13px;
    background: #85a;
    color: white;
    border-radius: 8px;
  }
  #server select, #server button {
    border: 1px solid white;
    border-radius: 3px;
    color: white;
    font: inherit;
    background: inherit;
  }
  #latency option {
    background: #85a;
  }
  #editors {
    padding-top: 10px;
    overflow: hidden;
  }
  .editor {
    margin-top: 10px;
    padding-left: 80px;
    position: relative;
  }
  .editor:before {
    position: absolute;
    left: 10px; top: -1000px; bottom: calc(100% - 13px); width: 80px;
    border-left: 5px solid #85a;
    border-bottom: 5px solid #85a;
    border-radius: 0 0 0 18px;
    content: "";
    pointer-events: none;
  }
  .editor.cut:before {
    width: 40px;
  }
  .cut-control {
    position: absolute;
    left: 35px; top: 15px;
  }
  .cm-editor {
    border: 3px solid #85a;
    border-radius: 2px;
  }
  .cm-editor .cm-scroller {
    height: 70px;
  }
</style>

<div id=server>
  <span style="font-size: 150%; font-weight: bold">Server</span>
  <label style="margin-left: 1em">Latency ≈ <select id=latency>
    <option value=10>10ms</option>
    <option value=50 selected>50ms</option>
    <option value=250>250ms</option>
  </select></label>
  <button id=addpeer style="margin-left: 1em">Add peer</button>
</div>
<div id=editors></div>
<script defer src="../../codemirror.js"></script>
<script defer src="collab.js"></script>

The main difficulty with this style of editing is handling of
conflicting edits—since network communication isn't instantaneous, it
is possible for people to make changes at the same time, which have to
be reconciled in some way when synchronizing everybody up again.

CodeMirror comes with utilities for collaborative editing based on
[operational
transformation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operational_transformation)
with a central authority (server) that assigns a definite order to the
changes. This example describes the practical information you need to
set up such a system. For more theoretical information, see [this blog
post](https://marijnhaverbeke.nl/blog/collaborative-editing-cm.html).

(It is also possible to wire up different collaborative editing
algorithms to CodeMirror. See for example
[Yjs](https://github.com/yjs/y-codemirror.next).)

## Principles

Collaborative systems implemented with the
[@codemirror/collab](##collab) package work like this:

 - There is a central system (authority) that builds up a history of
   changes.

 - Individual editors (peers) track which version of the authority's
   history they have synchronized with, and which local (unconfirmed)
   changes they have made on top of that.

 - All peers set up some way to receive new changes from the
   authority. When changes come in...

   - If some of those changes are the peer's own changes, those
     changes are removed from the list of unconfirmed changes.

   - Remote changes are applied to the local editor state.

   - If there are unconfirmed changes present, operational
     transformation is used to transpose the remote changes across
     the unconfirmed local ones, and vice versa, so that the remote
     changes can be applied to the peer's current document, and the
     updated local changes can be submitted to the server as if they
     came after the remote changes.

   - The peer's document version is moved forward.

 - Whenever there are unconfirmed local changes, the peer should try
   to send them to the authority, along with its current synchronized
   version.

   - If that version matches the server's version, the server
     accepts the changes as-is and adds them to its history.

   - Otherwise, the server can, depending on how complex it is and on
     whether it has access to all the changes that happened since the
     client's version, either reject the updates, or
     [rebase](##collab.rebaseUpdates) and accept them.

The more tricky logic that a peer must apply is implemented in the
@codemirror/collab package, but to set up a collaborative system you
must implement the authority (which can be very simple) and wire up
the communication between the peers and the authority (which can get a
bit more subtle due to the nature of networked/asynchronous systems).

## The Authority

In this example, the authority is a [web
worker](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Worker). That
helps simulate the asynchronous nature of communication, and the need
to serialize data that goes over the communication channel, while
still allowing everything to run inside the browser. In the real
world, it'll typically be a server program communicating with peers
using HTTP requests or
[websockets](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API).

Error handling will be omitted throughout the example to keep things
concise.

The state kept by the authority is just an array of updates (holding a
[change set](##state.ChangeSet) and a client ID), and a current
document.

!authorityState

The document is used by new peers to be able to join the session—they
must ask the authority for a starting document and version before they
are able to participate.

This code implements the three message types that the worker handles.

 - **`pullUpdates`** is used to ask the authority if any new updates
   have come in since a given document version. It “blocks” until new
   changes come in when asked for the current version (this is what
   the `pending` variable is used for).

 - **`pushUpdates`** is used to send an array of updates. The server
   stores the updates, rolls its document forward, and notifies any
   waiting `pullUpdates` requests.

 - **`getDocument`** is used by new peers to retrieve a starting
   state.

We'll use a crude mechanism based on
[`postMessage`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Worker/postMessage)
and [message
channels](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MessageChannel)
to communicate between the main page and the worker. Feel free to
ignore the message-channel-related code in `resp`, since that's not
terribly relevant here.

!authorityMessage

In older versions of @codemirror/collab,
[`rebaseUpdates`](##collab.rebaseUpdates) didn't exist the way to
handle updates where the client's version didn't match the server's
document version was to simply reject them. The client would have to
fetch peer updates and try again.

This is still a reasonable way to implement the protocol, but it can
in some circumstances lead to _starvation_—if a client has a higher
latency than its peers, and those peers keep submitting changes, it
may be unable to get its updates through for a long time, as they keep
getting rejected. Thus, it is recommended to rebase updates whenever
practical. If you don't store the full history of updates, but only
recent ones, it is still reasonable to reject requests with a version
that you don't have the update objects for anymore.

## The Peer

On the other side of the connection, I'm using some messy magic code
to introduce fake latency and broken connections (the scissor controls
in the demo above). This isn't very interesting, so I'm hiding it in a
`Connection` class which is omitted from the code below (you can find
the full code on
[GitHub](https://github.com/codemirror/website/tree/master/site/examples/collab/collab.ts)).

These wrappers interact with the worker process through messages,
returning a promise that eventually resolves with some result (when
the connection is cut, the promises will just hang until it is
reestablished).

!wrappers

To manage the communication with the authority, we use a [view
plugin](##view.ViewPlugin) (which are almost always the right place
for asynchronous logic in CodeMirror). This plugin will constantly (in
an async loop) try to pull in new updates and, if it gets them, apply
them to the editor using the
[`receiveUpdates`](##collab.receiveUpdates) function.

When the content of the editor changes, the plugin starts trying to
push its local updates. It keeps a field to make sure it only has one
running push request, and crudely sets a timeout to retry pushing when
there are still unconfirmed changes after the request. This can happen
when the push failed or new changes were introduced while it was in
progress.

(The request scheduling is something you'll _definitely_ want to do in
a more elaborate way in a real setup. It can help to include both
pushing and pulling in a single state machine, where the peer only
does one of the two at a time.)

The `peerExtension` function returns such a plugin plus a `collab`
extension configured with the appropriate start version.

!peerExtension

Now you can create a wired-up editor view with code like this.

```typescript
async function createPeer(connection: Connection) {
  let {version, doc} = await getDocument(connection)
  let state = EditorState.create({
    doc,
    extensions: [basicSetup, peerExtension(version, connection)]
  })
  return new EditorView({state})
}
```

## Dropping Old Updates

This implementation endlessly accumulates updates for every single
change made in the editors.

This can be okay, or even useful, since it provides a detailed history
of how the document was written (especially if you add additional data
like timestamps and user identifiers).

But when you don't want or need it, it is possible to, at some point,
start dropping old updates. The downside of this is that it will no
longer be possible for peers that have been offline since those
updates were made to resynchronize with the authority. They will ask
for all updates since a given version, and that data will no longer be
available. Depending on the use case and the time period involved,
this may be acceptable.

It is also possible to “compress” changes using
[`ChangeSet.compose`](##state.ChangeSet.compose) to store a less
finely grained history. This will still prevent peers from
synchronizing (when they ask for a version that has been compressed
away), but when done on old data it can greatly reduce the size of the
history data.

## Shared Effects

By default, the only thing that is shared through such a
collaborative-editing channel is document changes (the `changes` field
in the update objects). Sometimes it is useful to also use this
mechanism to share other information that should be distributed
between clients.

To do that, when calling the [`collab`](##collab.collab) extension
constructor, you can pass a
[`sharedEffects`](##collab.collab^config.sharedEffects) function which
produces an array of “shared effects” from a transaction. Shared
effects are instances of [`StateEffect`](##state.StateEffect) that
should be applied in other peers as well. In the simplest case,
`sharedEffects` could just filter the transaction's effects, picking
out specific types of transactions.

Say, for example, we have a plugin tracking marked regions in the
document. Editors keep a state field with a collection of marked
regions, and have a `markRegion` effect that they use to add regions
to this.

```typescript
import {StateEffect} from "@codemirror/state"

const markRegion = StateEffect.define<{from: number, to: number}>({
  map({from, to}, changes) {
    from = changes.mapPos(from, 1)
    to = changes.mapPos(to, -1)
    return from < to ? {from, to} : undefined
  }
})
```

Since the effect refers to positions in the document, it needs a
[`map`](##state.StateEffect^define^spec.map) function to map it
through document changes. This will also be used by the collab package
when reconciling local and remote changes.

Now with a function like this as `sharedEffects` source, we'd get
these effects in our `Update` objects:

```typescript
import {collab} from "@codemirror/collab"

let markCollab = {
  // ...
  sharedEffects: tr => tr.effects.filter(e => e.is(markRegion))
}
```

The library doesn't provide any utilities for serializing effects, so
in order to send them around as JSON you need your own custom
serialization code for the `effects` field in updates.

But once you set that up, assuming that all peers have some extension
that handles these effects installed, applying them across peers
should just work. The effects get applied in transactions created by
[`receiveUpdates`](##collab.receiveUpdates), and the state field that
manages such marks will pick them up from there.

There is one thing to keep in mind though. As described in more detail
in [the collaborative-editing blog
post](https://marijnhaverbeke.nl/blog/collaborative-editing-cm.html#position-mapping),
the kind of position mapping done in the effect's `map` function is
not guaranteed to converge to the same positions when applied in
different order by different peers. For some use cases (such as
showing other people's cursor), this may be harmless. For others, you
might need to set up a separate mechanism to periodically synchronize
the positions.
